http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2015/09/refugee-tale-memoirs-european-refugee-150923093944549.html
A refugee tale: Memoirs of a European refugee - Al Jazeera English
Eki Rrahmani fled Kosovo in an oil tanker, but what will become of this century's refugees, he asks.
By
Kosovar Albanians flee Pristina in 1999 [Afrim Hajrullahu]
April, 1987.
A local Albanian man stopped me. The Serbs were angry, he said, I had better go home. I cycled past the crowd and to my grandparents' house. On the way, I passed the Cultural Centre, where people were throwing stones at the police. The policemen raised their batons and plowed into the mass. A tall man came out of the building, followed by a small crowd. "No one will dare beat you ever again," he told those gathered.
The notebook became clammy in my hands, until Milosevic jumped out of the TV, snatched it and gobbled it whole. It wasn't the only thing he would devour.
 
A few minutes later he climbed onto the top floor of the Centre in order to make himself heard.
The six o'clock news revealed that the man who had so adeptly climbed a building and delivered a speech before a euphoric crowd was Slobodan Milosevic. It was the first time I had heard of him. But the concern on the faces of the adults who gathered at my granny's home told me something was wrong. Milosevic's speech affected them in a way that suggested things would never be the same again. I could almost smell the stench of dark days to come.
That evening, I sat listening to the adults exchange worried thoughts. They were so deep in conversation that none of them noticed that the kids were still awake.
I was supposed to do my homework, but the notebook became clammy in my hands until Milosevic jumped out of the TV, snatched it and gobbled it whole. It wasn't the only thing he would devour.
1989.
I could just about make out the black wall: a police cordon approaching, unearthly gas masks covering countless faces. They were getting closer and closer .... Then out of the ethereal haze, a little voice. A kid, no older than six. He held out an onion
 
We ran fast, up towards the Hill of the Brave - a stampede through quiet suburbia .... We had avoided the immediate danger, I thought .... Then something hit me on the head. I kept falling and falling, floating in an eddy of musty air. I hit the ground. I was dead
 
I handed over my fake passport and fixed my gaze on the shiny bit of the lens of my glasses, feeling, somehow, that I could hide there. The guard nodded and gave me the passport back. I slipped through to the other side, desperately fighting the urge to run
 

But this wasn't the end. This was just the beginning. Kosovars had to pick themselves up, heal and then carry on. 
Jeton Kulinxha contributed to this article. 
The views expressed in this article are the author's own and do not necessarily reflect Al Jazeera's editorial policy. 

